# Hypothesis Testing and ANOVA

## Preview
This assignment aims to directly test my hypothesis by evaluating, based on a sample of 2412 U.S. cannabis users aged between 18 and 30 years old **(subsetc5)**, my research question with the goal of generalizing the results to the larger population of NESARC survey, from where the sample has been drawn. Therefore, I statistically assessed the evidence, provided by NESARC codebook, in favor of or against the association between cannabis use and mental illnesses, such as major depression and general anxiety, in U.S. adults. As a result, in the first place I used ols function in order to examine if depression **(‘MAJORDEP12’)** and anxiety **('GENAXDX12’)** disorders, which are both categorical explanatory variables, are correlated with the quantity of joints smoked per day when using the most **('S3BQ4’)**, which is a quantitative response variable. Thus, I ran ANOVA (Analysis Of Variance) method (C->Q) twice and calculated the F-statistics and the associated p-values for each disorder separately, so that null and alternate hypothesis are specified. Furthermore, I used ols function once again and tested the association between the frequency of cannabis use **('S3BD5Q2E’)**, which is a 10-level categorical explanatory variable, and the quantity of joints smoked per day when using the most **('S3BQ4’)**, which is a quantitative response variable. In this case, for my third one-way ANOVA (C->Q), after measuring the F-statistic and the p-value, I used Tukey HSDT to perform a post hoc test, that conducts post hoc paired comparisons in the context of my ANOVA, since my explanatory variable has more than 2 levels. By this way it is possible to identify the situations where null hypothesis can be safely rejected without making an excessive type 1 error. In addition, both means and standard deviations of joints quantity response variable, were measured separately in each ANOVA, grouped by the explanatory variables (depression, anxiety and frequency of cannabis use) using the groupby function. For the code and the output I used Spyder (IDE).

## Output

